\input texinfo

@setfilename gnus-coding
@settitle Gnus Coding Style and Maintainance Guide
@syncodeindex fn cp
@syncodeindex vr cp
@syncodeindex pg cp

@copying
Copyright (c) 2004, 2005  Free Software Foundation, Inc.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with the Front-Cover texts being ``A GNU
Manual'', and with the Back-Cover Texts as in (a) below.  A copy of the
license is included in the section entitled ``GNU Free Documentation
License'' in the Emacs manual.

(a) The FSF's Back-Cover Text is: ``You have freedom to copy and modify
this GNU Manual, like GNU software.  Copies published by the Free
Software Foundation raise funds for GNU development.''

This document is part of a collection distributed under the GNU Free
Documentation License.  If you want to distribute this document
separately from the collection, you can do so by adding a copy of the
license to the document, as described in section 6 of the license.
@end quotation
@end copying


@titlepage
@title Gnus Coding Style and Maintainance Guide

@author by Reiner Steib  <Reiner.Steib@@gmx.de>

@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c Obviously this is only a very rudimentary draft.  We put it in CVS
@c anyway hoping that it might annoy someone enough to fix it.  ;-)
@c Fixing only a paragraph also is appreciated.

@node Top

@chapter Gnus Coding Style
@section Dependencies

The Gnus distribution contains a lot of libraries that have been written
for Gnus and used intensively for Gnus.  But many of those libraries are
useful on their own.  E.g. other Emacs Lisp packages might use the
@acronym{MIME} library @xref{Top, ,Top, emacs-mime, The Emacs MIME
Manual}.

@subsection General purpose libraries

@table @file

@item netrc.el
@file{.netrc} parsing functionality.
@c As of 2005-10-21...
There are no Gnus dependencies in this file.

@item format-spec.el
Functions for formatting arbitrary formatting strings.
@c As of 2005-10-21...
There are no Gnus dependencies in this file.

@end table

@subsection Encryption and security

@table @file
@item encrypt.el
File encryption routines
@c As of 2005-10-25...
There are no Gnus dependencies in this file.

@item password.el
Read passwords from user, possibly using a password cache.
@c As of 2005-10-21...
There are no Gnus dependencies in this file.

@item tls.el
TLS/SSL support via wrapper around GnuTLS
@c As of 2005-10-21...
There are no Gnus dependencies in this file.

@item pgg*.el
Glue for the various PGP implementations.
@c As of 2005-10-21...
There are no Gnus dependencies in these files.

@end table

@subsection Networking

@table @file
@item dig.el
Domain Name System dig interface.
@c As of 2005-10-21...
There are no serious Gnus dependencies in this file.  Uses
@code{gnus-run-mode-hooks} (a wrapper function).

@item dns*.el
Domain Name Service lookups.
@c As of 2005-10-21...
There are no Gnus dependencies in these files.
@end table

@subsection Mail and News related RFCs

@table @file
@item pop3.el
Post Office Protocol (RFC 1460) interface.
@c As of 2005-10-21...
There are no Gnus dependencies in this file.

@item imap.el
@acronym{IMAP} library.
@c As of 2005-10-21...
There are no Gnus dependencies in this file.

@item ietf-drums.el
Functions for parsing RFC822bis headers.
@c As of 2005-10-21...
There are no Gnus dependencies in this file.

@item rfc1843.el
HZ (rfc1843) decoding.  HZ is a data format for exchanging files of
arbitrarily mixed Chinese and @acronym{ASCII} characters.
@c As of 2005-10-21...
@code{rfc1843-gnus-setup} seem to be useful only for Gnus.  Maybe this
function should be relocated to remove dependencies on Gnus.  Other
minor dependencies: @code{gnus-newsgroup-name} could be eliminated by
using an optional argument to @code{rfc1843-decode-article-body}.

@item rfc2045.el
Functions for decoding rfc2045 headers

@item rfc2047.el
Functions for encoding and decoding rfc2047 messages

@item rfc2104.el
RFC2104 Hashed Message Authentication Codes

@item rfc2231.el
Functions for decoding rfc2231 headers
@end table

@subsection message

All message composition from Gnus (both mail and news) takes place in
Message mode buffers.  Message mode is intended to be a replacement for
Emacs mail mode.  There should be no Gnus dependencies in
@file{message.el}.

@subsection Gnus backends

The files @file{nn*.el} provide functionality for accessing NNTP
(@file{nntp.el}), IMAP (@file{nnimap.el}) and several other Mail back
ends (probably @file{nnml.el}, @file{nnfolder.el} and
@file{nnmaildir.el} are the ones most widely used mail back ends).


@c message / gnus
@c 
@c nn*
@c 
@c mm*
@c
@c rfc*
@c 
@c pgg*
@c tla netrc pop3 dig dns ...
@c format-spec.el


@section Compatibility

@c Compatibility with XEmacs and older Emacs versions in v5-10 and in the
@c trunk.

@c @table
@c x
@c @end table

@chapter Gnus Maintainance Guide

@section Stable and development versions

The CVS trunk is developed quite actively.

@c Most of the time Gnus is developed on the trunk.

@c Exeption: several month of feature freeze after a release,
@c e.g. 5.10.1


@section Syncing

@c Some MIDs related to this follow.  Use http://thread.gmane.org/MID
@c (and click on the subject) to get the thread on Gmane.

@c Some quotes from Miles Bader follow...

@c <v9eklyke6b.fsf@marauder.physik.uni-ulm.de>
@c <buovfd71nkk.fsf@mctpc71.ucom.lsi.nec.co.jp>

I do Emacs->Gnus less often (than Gnus->Emacs) because it tends to
require more manual work.

By default I sync about once a week.  I also try to follow any Gnus
threads on the mailing lists and make sure any changes being discussed
are kept more up-to-date (so say 1-2 days delay for "topical" changes).


@c <buovfd71nkk.fsf@mctpc71.ucom.lsi.nec.co.jp>

BTW, just to add even more verbose explanation about the syncing thing:

Basically my idea is that the Emacs-Gnus gateway will cause all common
files in Emacs and Gnus v5-10 to be identical except when there's a very
good reason (e.g., the Gnus version string in Emacs says "5.11", but the
v5-10 version string remains "5.10.whatever").  Furthermore, all changes
in these files in either Emacs or the v5-10 branch will be installed
into the Gnus CVS trunk, again except where there's a good reason
(typically so far the only exception has been that the changes already
exist in the trunk in modified form).  Because of this, when the next
Emacs Gnus upgrade comes, it should be very easy -- just plonk in the
files from the Gnus trunk without worrying about lost changes from the
Emacs tree.

The effect of this is that as hacker, you should generally only have to
make changes in one place:

  1) If it's a file which is thought of as being outside of Gnus (e.g.,
     the new "encrypt.el"), you should probably make the change in the
     Emacs tree, and it will show up in the Gnus tree a few days later.

     If you don't have Emacs CVS access (or it's inconvenient), you can
     change such a file in the v5-10 branch, and it should propagate to
     Emacs CVS -- however, it will get some extra scrutiny (by me) to see
     if the changes are possibly controversial and need discussion on the
     mailing list.  [Many changes are obvious bug-fixes however, so often
     there won't be any problem.]

  2) If it's to a Gnus file, and it's important enough that it should be
     part of Emacs/v5-10, then you can make the change on the v5-10
     branch, and it will go into Emacs CVS and the Gnus CVS trunk (a few
     days later).

     If you know that there will be conflicts (perhaps because the
     affected source code is different in v5-10 and the Gnus CVS trunk),
     then you can install your change in both places, and when I try to
     sync them, there will be a conflict -- however, since in most such
     cases there would be a conflict _anyway_, it's often easier for me
     to resolve it simply if I see two "identical" changes, and can just
     choose the proper one, rather than having to actually fix the code.

  3) For general Gnus development changes, of course you just make the
     change on the Gnus CVS trunk and it goes into Emacs a few years
     later... :-)

Of course in any case, if you just can't wait for me to sync your
change, you can commit it in more than one place and probably there will
be no problem; usually the changes are textually identical anyway, so
can be easily resolved automatically (sometimes I notice silly things in
such multiple commits, like whitespace differences, and unify those ;-).


@section Miscellanea

@heading @file{GNUS-NEWS}

Starting from No Gnus, the @file{GNUS-NEWS} is created from
@file{texi/gnus-news.texi}.  Don't edit @file{GNUS-NEWS}.  Edit
@file{texi/gnus-news.texi}, type @command{make GNUS-NEWS} in the
@file{texi} directory and commit @file{GNUS-NEWS} and
@file{texi/gnus-news.texi}.


@c Local Variables:
@c mode: texinfo
@c coding: iso-8859-1
@c End:

@ignore
   arch-tag: ab15234c-2c8a-4cbd-8111-1811bcc6f931
@end ignore
